What is sketch?
————

Sketch is an easy to use and powerful digital design tool for the Mac, made by Bohemian Coding.

Its popularity and fan base has been ever increasing and is now widely recognised and the design tool of choice for many digital companies and startups throughout the world.



Sketch interface
————
Broken into 4 parts, toolbar, infinite canvas, layer list & inspector. 

Toolbar		- Main toolbar contains everything needed to make new designs.
Insert		- Anything selected here will create a new layers, building blocks for designs. 
Group/ungroup	- Options for keeping doc organised.
Create symbol	- Powerful tool for creating symbol instances of objects.
Zoom		- show more / less indicated by % increment.
Editing controls	- Edit / transform, rotate allow you to manipulate shapes. 
masks/scale	- Clip layers to shapes and scale them. 
baleen opt	- explained later. 
Fwd/Bck		- Organise layers.
Mirror		- preview on mobile device.
view		- Show and hide visual aid’s
exports		- own stage entirely. 
Canvas		- Infinite in every direction recenter with ‘view > centre canvas’ 
Inspector	- show items properties, change colours and style of a layer.
Layer list	- all layers appear, can be organised and arranged. 



Selecting, Moving, and Resizing Layers
————

Selecting	- Hover > blue outline > click… show what is being selected or select from layer list. 
Selected	- when selected you can see the 8 handles, clicking and dragging alters size. 
Sizing		- Change the size directly in property panel with values. 
Moving		- Just drag around layer. arrow key nudges 1 px, hold shift + arrow key nudges in 10px increments.
duplicate	- Right click > duplicate, directly above. Alt + Drag also creates a duplicate of layer. 



Deleting, Locking and Grouping Layers
————

Delete		- Select desired layer and hit backspace, right click and select delete. 
Hide layer	- Hover over layer in layer list until ‘eye’ icon appears click and toggle to hide. 
Locked layer	- Remains visible but can only be selected via the layer list. Right click > Lock layer. 
Grouping	- Grouped items appear in a folder within the layer list. moving this folder moves all layers within. Use icon in tool bar or right click to toggle grouping. 
Smart guides	- Shows what other layers can snap to, and show distances. Hold Alt key to display px distance. 



Moving Through Your Document
————

Canvas		- Scroll using track pad, or hold space and click and drag to move around canvas. 
Rulers		- View > Show rules toggles rulers. 
Zooming		- -/+ on zoom icon to zoom in and out. / Z+Click to zoom in and Z+alt+Click to zoom out / command +/- to zoom in and out via keyboard. 


Styling Your Layers
————

Colour		- Change via the property panel on the right, click fill and select desired type. 
Gradients	- Radial, angular select from above colour. 
Fills		- Add noise and patters to fills also. 
Opacity		- Change the opacity of colour with the slider.
Colour picker	- Pick any colour even outside of sketch window, using either RBGA or HEX. 
Borders		- underneath fill in property panel, add borders, choose border position and thickness. COG icon allows dashed lines and joins / ends
add icons	- add multiple fils and shadows, layers above one another.
Blend modes	- Changing blend mode lets you mix layers or colours into one another. 
CSS		- Right click > Copy CSS attributes copies css to clipboard that can be used directly within CSS file. 
Shared styles	- Create shared style of a layers blend and fill options to easily duplicate on another shape / element. 

Shapes and Vectors
————

Line tool	- Click and drag to create lines, draws path with a border - no fill. 
Arrow		- Same as line tool but creates a arrow head at one head. 
Rectangle 	- hotkey ‘r’ creates a rectangle, holding shift sets height and width to same proportion. Radius changes corner radius. 
Oval		- hotkey ‘o’ creates a circle, holding shift sets hight and with to same proportion.
Rounded		- Rectangle with rounded corner same as others. 
Star		- Add points and adjust radius within properties panel. 

Booleans	- Create a union, can move around by opening combined shape folder. 
Union		- Combines paths.
Subtract	- Removes one path from another. 
Intersect	- Shows only intersecting part of path.
Difference	- Shows everything but the intersecting part of a path. 


Using the Vector Tool
————

Vectors		- Using pen tool by clicking and dragging, create handles to adjust arch of curves. 
Mirrored	- Two angles equal distance from point
Asymmetric	- moves both handles
Disconnected	- Move in any direction. 
Transform	- Add perspective by moving circular handles. 
Rotate		- Rotate by any dimension, change rotation point by dragging ‘crossed circle’ to desired point. 
Flip		- Flip horizontal or vertically within the properties panel. 
Masking		- 2 layers over lapping can be masked on top of one another in an un-destricutive way. 


Working with text
————

Text tool	- Hot key ’T’ or use inner text and type desired text. By default text width is infinite. 
Fixed width	- Toggle with to fixed to give it a container. Click and drag to create a ‘fixed width’ text box. 
Style options	- within properties panel, colour, don’t size and font weight. 

 



