What is Typography?
————

Typography is the visual component of the written word. This means typography comes in to play when words are visually displayed on services like screens, paper, posters, signs, and more.

A major purpose behind typography is utility. This means presenting the text in a way that is useful, clear, and legible to it's reader.

Another purpose behind typography is design. Type can have a personality or mood. It gives off a certain vibe, and conveys something to the reader before they've even digested a single word on the page.


Terminology 
————

Typeface	- Design of a collection of characters.
Font		- Single instance or embodiment of a specific weight, width or style.

Cap height	- Height of capital letter.
Baseline	- Guideline for where majority of characters rest.
X-height	- height of lower case letters, determined by letter ‘x’. Can drastically effect legality at small sizes. 
Descender	- Parts of characters that decent below the base line. 
Ascender	- Parts of characters that ascent above the cap height. 

Serif		- Serifs are projections that finish off the main strokes of a letter.
Sans serif	- Without serifs
Contrast	- Differences between thick & thin strokes within a character. Face without variying thickness of strokes has less contrast than a typeface that does. 
Contrast 	- Can also describe how letter appears on its background i.e B/O/W or W/O/B. 
Colour		- Actual colour of word or element / Overall density of ink on a page. Different weights relative to space. 



Different Types of Type
————

Genres or type and their characteristics. Way that letters look often conveys a messages to the viewer. 


Serif		- Humanist, Old Style, Transitional, Didone, slab. 

Humanist 	- Humanist typefaces arose in the 1460's and 1470's with strong calligraphic influence. Lower x-heigh, unrefined serifs, lower contrast. i.e Janson, Kennerley and Centaur.
Old Style	- Old Style came about next in the later part of the 15th century. The letter forms were getting more refined as type and less influenced from calligraphy. i.e Goudy Old Style, Palatino, Perpetua and Plantin.
Transitional	- 18th century transitional Typefaces on the rise. Decreasing calligraphic flow continues with flatter serifs and exaggerated contrast between thicks and thins i.e Baskerville, Bookman, and Clearface (ITC).
Dione		- Last 18th C No calligraphic influence, thinner serif, extreme contrast… high fashion great at large sizes. i.e Bodoni and Didot.
Slab serif	- Early 19th C extreme serif sizes a and less contrast. Used as headings as they’re bold at large sizes. i.e Rockwell, Clarendon and Egyptinne.

Sans Serif	- No serifs literally without serif.


Grotesque	- Late 19th C, I.e Akzidenz-Grotesk derived from Didot as they have similar characteristic. 
Neo-Grotesque	- More common sans-serifs i.e Helvetica and universe. Similarities between characters can compromise legibility as body copy. 
Humanist	- i.e Tahoma, Gill Sans and Frutiger… more legible as body copy as they have more contrast between strokes.
Geometrics	- i.e Futura, bank gothic basic on geometric shapes. 

Scripts		- Typefaces based on handwriting. 

Formal		- Based on 17th / 18th C masters writing some contrast like quill. Typified by weddings. 
Casual		- More free and casual, more light hearted less formal. 



Print vs. The Web
————

Desktop fonts	- Locally Stored, work well with applications for use intended for print and desktop apps
Web fonts	- Not stored locally, intended for websites, fairly new to industry stands.
Browsers	- Lots of various browsers render fonts at their own sizes.
Licensing	- Should not upload licensed desktop fonts online as web fonts. =


Choosing a Text Typeface for the Web
————

Think about context, i.e. Paragraphs, Headings or Navigation. Text face vs Display face. Text face can be called ‘anchor face’ try to get legibility right. Mood of face should work well but don’t sacrifice legibility. 

X-height	- Find ext high that will work well for text font.
letter spacing	- Enough letter spacing to read at a smaller size.
counters	- large open counters are nice ad.

old style no.	- below baseline work well with body type.
lining no.	- better for display and headlines.

Make sure you get what you need, range or weight? italics? Widths? Small caps? Need accented characters? 



Choosing a Display Typeface for Web
————

Display typefaces are meant for larger sizes like big headlines, site titles, or pool quotes. This allows for a bit more expressive and creative opportunity with letter forms.

Legibility	- Even though these are displayed at larger sizes, should still be easy to read. 
Mood		- Does the mood of the header fit the content, can be more expressive. 
History		- Period fonts for sites with historical settings.
Industry	- Make sure that they’re specific to industry.


Self-hosted Webfonts
————

self-hosted 	- This means actual web-fonts hosted yourself and served up via the @web-font.
licence 	- ensure licensed for web use. 
Subsets		- Create customer subsets of fonts when self hosted.
 

Webfont Hosting Services
————

Webfont host	- Used via annual subscriptions, embedded JS allows you to call these in, also use googlefonts
access		- cheap large context.
easy		- can be implemented without trouble.
server		- have to rely on third party server, if down could be problematic.
exact		- may not have exact font you want to use. 


Fontstack	- providing list of fall back fonts, selecting native fonts for both mac and window


Weights and Styles
————

Faux bold	- Don’t fake bold with CSS, it can cause legibility issues. Provide better experience. 
Faux italic	- Again, font use faux as they’re not just slanted there are totally different characters. 

weight		- set numerical value from 100 - 900, lots of potential weights. 
font style	- bold / italic 


Font-Sizing: Px, Em, and Rem
————

px		- fixed unit,  16 - 24 is good rule of thumb, larger sizes better for comfortable reading. Causes issues with responsive design.
em		- relative units that scale depending on their parent. Can create compound issues when nesting. 
rem		- Instead of being relative to parent Rems are relevant to root html size. 


Horizontal Space: Measure and Margins
————

measure		- term used to describe the length of a line. 45 - 75 characters being optimal.
max width 	- use to restrict measure, good place to start it by multiplying body font by 30. 
whitespace	- use margin padding to give type room to breath, restricted white space can make page seem flustered and cramped.



Vertical Space: Line-Height and Vertical Rhythm
————

Line height, also referred to as letting or line spacing, deals with the vertical space between consecutive lines of text. Vertical rhythm balance layout and enhance readability, consistent and line and paragraph encourages readers to see a pattern an continue to read.

line-height	- add space between top and bottom of line of text, based on font size. 
baseline	- Ensuring text and paragraphs are to baselines will make much more constant vertical rhythm. Although hard to achieve without using static layouts. 
poor rhythm	- text off baseline.


Typographic Hierarchy: Weight, Style, Size, and Position
————

Information sorted by its importance, dictated by size and colour. Presenting information in a relevant order. Can be used to give emphasis where needed, text-transform can be used to achieve this. 

uppercase	- emphasis, impact, authority, over use can really effect readability. 
Small caps	- less ‘in your face’ uppercase characters at smaller size, just above x-height, works for abbreviations and official headings, work great with old style numbers.

proportion	- pair typefaces with similar proportions.
personality	- pair faces with similar ‘moods’ that play well together.
history		- pair faces with similar historical periods.
designer	- pair faces from similar type designers.



Responsive Typography 
————

Responsive typography is a subset of responsive design, focusing solely on the typography as a response to different screen sizes. Alter widths to give plenty of space for type to breath. Don’t use pixels in responsive type. 

body font size	- Increase or decrease according to viewport, it’s okay to scale down body for mobile. 
Orphan		- Single word on a line
&nbsp;		- use nonbreaking space instead of a ‘space’ to keep two words on same line. 
headings	- prone to be too big on mobile
measure		- use as a basis for breakpoints (when measure gets to long / short alter layout / scale)



Advanced Web Typography
————

Kerning, letter spacing, ligatures.

letter spacing	- aka ‘tracking’ effects every character that it’s applied too, tighter heavier / wider lighter looking. Don’t adjust too wide as spaces and letters can get muddled.  
Kerning 	- Amount of space between specific letters, not whole body of copy. Adjust to be evenly spaced. (requires CSS to make auto in some browsers. 
ligatures	- Ligatures improve the appearance of text for letters that are too close together. They create a smooth transition between letters by connecting certain character combinations. E
font-feature-settings: “liga”	- Enable ligatures for fonts with ligature support. 
Widow		- Single line of text that flows over to a single column. 
Reverse		- over justified, large gaps between text.
Rags		- un-even gaps at the end of left aligned text - large gaps problem. 
Smart quotes	- Use smart quotes and proper characters by using html character entities. (open and closed quotes i.e &ldquo; and &rdquo;)
Hyphens		- Don’t use hyphens to interrupt text, use ‘en dashes’ they’re longer and used to indicated ranges of numbers. ‘en dashes’ are even longer, and used for a ‘break in thought.’
Horizontal ellipsis	- Don’t use ‘…’ use ‘&hellip;’ html entity.
Alignment 	- Create even alignment for quotations and lists, position characters outside of margin to create emphasis… use negative text-indent. 
Icon-fonts	- Utilise icon fonts. Icon fonts can speed up design process and be 90% smaller than SVG and load 14% quicker.
VH / VW		- viewport height/width new measurements. 

